chapters/testing-techniques/property-based-testing.md, before:

# Property-Based Testing

We briefly mentioned property checks when talking about design-by-contracts.
There, we used properties in assertions.
We can also use properties for test case generation instead of just assertions.

Given that these properties should always hold, we can test them with any input that we like.
We typically make use of a generator to try a large number of different inputs,
without the need of writing them all ourselves.

These generators often create a series of random input values for a test function.
The test function then checks if the property holds using an assertion.
For each of the generated input values, this assertion is checked. If we find an input value that makes the assertion to fail, we can affirm that the property does not hold.

The first implementation of this idea was called *QuickCheck* and was originally developed for Haskell.
Nowadays, most languages have an implementation of quick check, including Java.
The Java implementation we are going to use is [jqwik](https://jqwik.net).

## Getting started with property-based tests

How does it work?

* First, we define properties.
Similar to defining test methods, we use an annotation on a method with an assertion to define a property: `@Property`.
QuickCheck includes a number of generators for various types.
For example, Strings, Integers, Lists, Dates, etc.

* To generate values, we add some parameters to the annotated method.
The arguments for these parameters will then be automatically generated by jqwik.
Note that the existing generators are often not enough when we want to test one
of our own classes; in these cases, we can create a custom generator which generates random values for this class.

* jqwik handles the number of generated inputs. After all, generating random values for the test input is tricky:
the generator might create too much data to efficiently handle while testing.

* Finally, as soon as jqwik finds a value that breaks the property, it
starts the shrinking process.
Using random input values can result in very large inputs.
For example lists that are very long or strings with a lot of characters.
These inputs can be very hard to debug. Smaller inputs are preferable when it comes to testing.
When an input makes a property fail, jqwik tries to find a shrunken version of this input that still makes the property fail.
That way it gets the smallest part of a larger input that actually causes the problem.

As an example:
a property of Strings is that if we add two strings together, the length of the result should be the same as the sum of the lengths of the two strings summed.
We can use property-based testing and jqwik's implementation to make tests for this property.

```java
public class PropertyTest {

  @Property
  void stringConcatenation(@ForAll String s1, @ForAll String s2) {
    String s3 = s1 + s2;

    Assertions.assertEquals(s1.length() + s2.length(), s3.length());
  }
}
```

`concatenationLength` had the `Property` annotation, so QuickCheck will generate random values for `s1` and `s2` and execute the test with those values.

Property-based testing changes the way we automate our tests.
We have only been automating the execution of our tests; the design and instantiation of test cases were always done by us, testers.
With property-based testing, by means of QuickCheck's implementation, we also automatically generate the inputs of the tests.


{% set video_id = "7kB6JaSH9p8" %}
{% include "/includes/youtube.md" %}


{% hint style='tip' %}
Note that, in the video, we still use the `@RunWith` annotation that was required in JUnit 4 (back then, we also used the _QuickCheck_ framework, and not _jqwik_. The code in this chapter was updated to _jqwik_, which natively supports JUnit 5. Nevertheless, the underlying idea is still the same.
{% endhint %}

## Other examples

Suppose the following requirement:

> Requirement: Passing grade
> A student passes an exam if s/he gets a grade >= 5.0. 
> Grades below that are a fail.
>
> Grades range from [1.0, 10.0].

We can identify two valid classes and one invalid class in the requirement: passing grades and non passing grades, and grades outside the range.

When doing property-based testing, we declare these properties in form of jqwik's properties:

* The `pass` property: for all floats, ranging from 1 (inclusive) to 5.0 (exclusive), the program should return false.
* The `fail` property: for all floats, ranging from 5 (inclusive) to 10 (inclusive), the program should return true.
* The `invalid` property: for all invalid grades (which we define as any number below 0.9 or greater than 10.1), the program must throw an exception.

```java
public class PassingGradesPBTest {

    private final PassingGrade pg = new PassingGrade();

    @Property
    void pass(@ForAll @FloatRange(min = 1f, max = 5.0f, maxIncluded = false) float grade) {
        assertThat(pg.passed(grade)).isFalse();
    }

    @Property
    void fail(@ForAll @FloatRange(min = 5.0f, max = 10.0f, maxIncluded = false) float grade) {
        assertThat(pg.passed(grade)).isTrue();
    }

    @Property
    void invalid(@ForAll("invalidGrades") float grade) {
        assertThatThrownBy(() -> {
            pg.passed(grade);
        })
        .isInstanceOf(IllegalArgumentException.class);
    }

    @Provide
    private Arbitrary<Float> invalidGrades() {
        return Arbitraries.oneOf(
                Arbitraries.floats().lessOrEqual(-0.9f),
                Arbitraries.floats().greaterOrEqual(10.1f));
    }
}

```

See another requirement, also used as an example in jqwik's website:

> Requirement: FizzBuzz
>
> The program must return 'Fizz' to multiples of 3, 
> 'Buzz' to multiples of 5,
> and 'FizzBuzz' to multiples of 3 and 5.
> The program must throw an exception for numbers below 0 (inclusive).

We can derive four clear properties:

* Property `fizz`: for all numbers divisible by 3, and not divisible by 5, the program returns fizz (see the `divisibleBy3` provider method to understand how we feed values with such properties).
* Property `buzz`: for all numbers divisible by 5 (and not divisible by 3), the program returns fizz.
* Property `fizzbuzz`: for all numbers divisible by 3 and 5, the program returns fizzbuzz.
* Property `noZeroesAndNegatives`: the program throws an exception for all numbers that are zero or smaller.

```java
public class FizzBuzzTest {

    private final FizzBuzz fb = new FizzBuzz();

    @Property
    boolean fizz(@ForAll("divisibleBy3") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("Fizz");
    }

    @Property
    boolean buzz(@ForAll("divisibleBy5") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("Buzz");
    }

    @Property
    boolean fizzbuzz(@ForAll("divisibleBy3and5") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("FizzBuzz");
    }

    @Property
    void noZeroesAndNegatives(@ForAll("negative") int i) {
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class, () -> fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("FizzBuzz"));
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy3() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 != 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy5() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 != 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy3and5() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 == 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> negative() {
        return Arbitraries.integers().lessOrEqual(0);
    }
}
```

## Property-based testing and AI

A lot of today's research goes into creating AI for software testing that generates good input values for tests.
We try to apply artificial intelligence to find inputs that exercise important parts of the system.

While the research's results are very promising, there still exist difficulties with this testing approach.
The main problem is that if the AI generates random inputs, how do we know for sure that the outcome is correct, i.e., how do we know that the problem behaved correctly for that random value?
With the unit test we made so far we manually took certain inputs, thought about the correct outcome, and made the assertion to expect that outcome.
When generating random inputs, we cannot think about the outcome every time.
The pre- and postconditions, contracts, and properties we discussed in this chapter can help us solve the problem.
By well-defining the system in these terms, we can use them as oracles in the test cases.
The properties always have to be true, so we can use them in all the randomly generated test cases.

We will discuss AI techniques more in a future chapter.

## Exercises

Commit message:

pointing to the code examples folder for more examples on pbt

chapters/testing-techniques/property-based-testing.md, after:

# Property-Based Testing

We briefly mentioned property checks when talking about design-by-contracts.
There, we used properties in assertions.
We can also use properties for test case generation instead of just assertions.

Given that these properties should always hold, we can test them with any input that we like.
We typically make use of a generator to try a large number of different inputs,
without the need of writing them all ourselves.

These generators often create a series of random input values for a test function.
The test function then checks if the property holds using an assertion.
For each of the generated input values, this assertion is checked. If we find an input value that makes the assertion to fail, we can affirm that the property does not hold.

The first implementation of this idea was called *QuickCheck* and was originally developed for Haskell.
Nowadays, most languages have an implementation of quick check, including Java.
The Java implementation we are going to use is [jqwik](https://jqwik.net).

## Getting started with property-based tests

How does it work?

* First, we define properties.
Similar to defining test methods, we use an annotation on a method with an assertion to define a property: `@Property`.
QuickCheck includes a number of generators for various types.
For example, Strings, Integers, Lists, Dates, etc.

* To generate values, we add some parameters to the annotated method.
The arguments for these parameters will then be automatically generated by jqwik.
Note that the existing generators are often not enough when we want to test one
of our own classes; in these cases, we can create a custom generator which generates random values for this class.

* jqwik handles the number of generated inputs. After all, generating random values for the test input is tricky:
the generator might create too much data to efficiently handle while testing.

* Finally, as soon as jqwik finds a value that breaks the property, it
starts the shrinking process.
Using random input values can result in very large inputs.
For example lists that are very long or strings with a lot of characters.
These inputs can be very hard to debug. Smaller inputs are preferable when it comes to testing.
When an input makes a property fail, jqwik tries to find a shrunken version of this input that still makes the property fail.
That way it gets the smallest part of a larger input that actually causes the problem.

As an example:
a property of Strings is that if we add two strings together, the length of the result should be the same as the sum of the lengths of the two strings summed.
We can use property-based testing and jqwik's implementation to make tests for this property.

```java
public class PropertyTest {

  @Property
  void stringConcatenation(@ForAll String s1, @ForAll String s2) {
    String s3 = s1 + s2;

    Assertions.assertEquals(s1.length() + s2.length(), s3.length());
  }
}
```

`concatenationLength` had the `Property` annotation, so QuickCheck will generate random values for `s1` and `s2` and execute the test with those values.

Property-based testing changes the way we automate our tests.
We have only been automating the execution of our tests; the design and instantiation of test cases were always done by us, testers.
With property-based testing, by means of QuickCheck's implementation, we also automatically generate the inputs of the tests.


{% set video_id = "7kB6JaSH9p8" %}
{% include "/includes/youtube.md" %}


{% hint style='tip' %}
Note that, in the video, we still use the `@RunWith` annotation that was required in JUnit 4 (back then, we also used the _QuickCheck_ framework, and not _jqwik_. The code in this chapter was updated to _jqwik_, which natively supports JUnit 5. Nevertheless, the underlying idea is still the same.
{% endhint %}

## Other examples

Suppose the following requirement:

> Requirement: Passing grade
> A student passes an exam if s/he gets a grade >= 5.0. 
> Grades below that are a fail.
>
> Grades range from [1.0, 10.0].

We can identify two valid classes and one invalid class in the requirement: passing grades and non passing grades, and grades outside the range.

When doing property-based testing, we declare these properties in form of jqwik's properties:

* The `pass` property: for all floats, ranging from 1 (inclusive) to 5.0 (exclusive), the program should return false.
* The `fail` property: for all floats, ranging from 5 (inclusive) to 10 (inclusive), the program should return true.
* The `invalid` property: for all invalid grades (which we define as any number below 0.9 or greater than 10.1), the program must throw an exception.

```java
public class PassingGradesPBTest {

    private final PassingGrade pg = new PassingGrade();

    @Property
    void pass(@ForAll @FloatRange(min = 1f, max = 5.0f, maxIncluded = false) float grade) {
        assertThat(pg.passed(grade)).isFalse();
    }

    @Property
    void fail(@ForAll @FloatRange(min = 5.0f, max = 10.0f, maxIncluded = false) float grade) {
        assertThat(pg.passed(grade)).isTrue();
    }

    @Property
    void invalid(@ForAll("invalidGrades") float grade) {
        assertThatThrownBy(() -> {
            pg.passed(grade);
        })
        .isInstanceOf(IllegalArgumentException.class);
    }

    @Provide
    private Arbitrary<Float> invalidGrades() {
        return Arbitraries.oneOf(
                Arbitraries.floats().lessOrEqual(-0.9f),
                Arbitraries.floats().greaterOrEqual(10.1f));
    }
}

```

See another requirement, also used as an example in jqwik's website:

> Requirement: FizzBuzz
>
> The program must return 'Fizz' to multiples of 3, 
> 'Buzz' to multiples of 5,
> and 'FizzBuzz' to multiples of 3 and 5.
> The program must throw an exception for numbers below 0 (inclusive).

We can derive four clear properties:

* Property `fizz`: for all numbers divisible by 3, and not divisible by 5, the program returns fizz (see the `divisibleBy3` provider method to understand how we feed values with such properties).
* Property `buzz`: for all numbers divisible by 5 (and not divisible by 3), the program returns fizz.
* Property `fizzbuzz`: for all numbers divisible by 3 and 5, the program returns fizzbuzz.
* Property `noZeroesAndNegatives`: the program throws an exception for all numbers that are zero or smaller.

```java
public class FizzBuzzTest {

    private final FizzBuzz fb = new FizzBuzz();

    @Property
    boolean fizz(@ForAll("divisibleBy3") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("Fizz");
    }

    @Property
    boolean buzz(@ForAll("divisibleBy5") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("Buzz");
    }

    @Property
    boolean fizzbuzz(@ForAll("divisibleBy3and5") int i) {
        return fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("FizzBuzz");
    }

    @Property
    void noZeroesAndNegatives(@ForAll("negative") int i) {
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class, () -> fb.fizzbuzz(i).equals("FizzBuzz"));
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy3() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 != 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy5() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 != 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> divisibleBy3and5() {
        return Arbitraries.integers()
                .greaterOrEqual(1)
                .filter(i -> i % 3 == 0)
                .filter(i -> i % 5 == 0);
    }

    @Provide
    Arbitrary<Integer> negative() {
        return Arbitraries.integers().lessOrEqual(0);
    }
}
```

You may see other examples in our [code repository](https://www.github.com/sttp-book/code-examples).

## Property-based testing and AI

A lot of today's research goes into creating AI for software testing that generates good input values for tests.
We try to apply artificial intelligence to find inputs that exercise important parts of the system.

While the research's results are very promising, there still exist difficulties with this testing approach.
The main problem is that if the AI generates random inputs, how do we know for sure that the outcome is correct, i.e., how do we know that the problem behaved correctly for that random value?
With the unit test we made so far we manually took certain inputs, thought about the correct outcome, and made the assertion to expect that outcome.
When generating random inputs, we cannot think about the outcome every time.
The pre- and postconditions, contracts, and properties we discussed in this chapter can help us solve the problem.
By well-defining the system in these terms, we can use them as oracles in the test cases.
The properties always have to be true, so we can use them in all the randomly generated test cases.

We will discuss AI techniques more in a future chapter.

## Exercises
